# NFL_Model
Machine learning project that created optimal models for NFL betting spreads and totals.

This project emulates the work done by many of these sports analytics companies that work to build sophisticated models that can accurately predict (to a reasonable degree) the outcomes of sporting events. Specifically, this project aimed to create a model that accurately predicts the results of NFL games. My model(s) predicted which team will win each respective matchup by how many points (the spread) and how many points will be scored in the game by both teams combined (the total). The spread (the projected margin of victory for the favorite in a given matchup) and the total (the projected total of points scored by both teams) are the most commonly bet numbers in sports betting. The model was created utilizing a variety of factors, including player performance statistics, team statistics, historical trend data, and potential game matchups.

In addition to accurately predicting the results of NFL games, a goal of this project was to identify the variables (player and team statistics) that are most important in predicting the outcomes of NFL games. This process was done by fitting various models on historical datasets and identifying which features carry the most weight (i.e. using the feature_importances_ attribute) in determining a given model’s predictions. 

This model(s) were built using historical data and statistics (both offense and defense) from the past 15 years. I utilized a dataset of basic offensive and defensive statistics from the past 15 years and then an advanced dataset of offensive and defensive statistics from the past 5 years, and then compared the performance of various models I test using these different datasets in an attempt to refine the absolute best features to use to create the most optimal model for this specific prediction task. The model(s) were evaluated using a variety of metrics, including mean squared error scores, adjusted r-squared scores, and oob scores, and were backtested for accuracy against all predictions (spread and total) compared to the closing betting line (often considered the consensus prediction of the companies that use data analytics to set betting lines and the general public that bet the lines) of the most recent 2022 NFL regular season by utilizing the comprehensive spreadspoke dataset (which can be extracted for free from Kaggle). The most optimal model(s) for both spread and total were the one(s) that most accurately produced a winning result if strictly followed based on its predictions for every NFL matchup from the 2022 regular season. 

All corresponding code, results, and summaries are included in the Jupyter notebooks. The project produced two models that successfully predicted the spread at a 59.04% win rate (ROI of 37.9%) and one model that successfully predicted the total at a 57.2% win rate (ROI of 27.4%). 
